Add Knapsack (#1280)
cp-algorithms/cp-algorithms: src/dynamic_programming/knapsack.md

so the maximum value in this case is $f_{i-1, j-w_i} + v_i$

From this we can derive the state transfer equation:

$$f_{i, j} = \max(f_{i-1, j}, f_{i-1, j-w_i} + v_i)$$

Further, as $f_{i}$ is only dependent on $f_{i-1}$, we can remove the first dimension. We obtain:

$$f_{j} = \max(f_{j}, f_{j-w_i} + v_i)$$

**It is important to remember and understand this transfer equation, because most of the transfer equations for knapsack problems are derived on this basis.**

### Implementation

Another thing to note is that it is easy to write **erroneous code** like this

```.c++
for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++)
  for (int j = 0; j <= W-w[i]; j++)
    f[j + w[i]] = max(f[j + w[i]], f[j] + v[i]);
```

What is wrong with this code? The enumeration order is wrong.

Observing the code carefully, we can find that: for the currently processed item $i$ and the current state $f_{i,j}$, 
when $j\geqslant w_{i}$, $f_{i,j}$ will be affected by $f_{i,j-w_{i}}$. 
This is equivalent to being able to be put item $i$ into the backpack multiple times, which is not consistent with the question.
(In fact, this is exactly the solution to the complete knapsack problem)

> To avoid this, we can change the order of enumeration from $W$ to $w_{i}$, so that the above error won't occour, because $f_{i, j}$ is always updated before $f_{i, j-w_i}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid this, we can change the order of execution to go over $j$ from $W$ to $w_{i}$, so that the above error won't occour, because $f_{i, j}$ is always implicitly updated before $f_{i, j-w_i}$
```

Therefore, the actual code is

```.c++
for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++)
  for (int j = W; j >= w[i]; j--)
    f[j] = max(f[j], f[j - w[i]] + v[i]);
```

## Complete Knapsack

The complete knapsack model is similar to the 0-1 knapsack, the only difference from the 0-1 knapsack is that an item can be selected an unlimited number of times instead of only once.

We can refer to the idea of 0-1 knapsack to define the state: $f_{i, j}$, the maximum value the knapsack can obtain using the first $i$ items with maximum capacity $j$.

> It should be noted that although the state definition is similar to that of a 0-1 knapsack, its state transfer equation is different from that of a 0-1 knapsack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be noted that although the state definition is similar to that of a 0-1 knapsack, its transition rule is different from that of a 0-1 knapsack.
```

### Explaination

> The trivial approach is, for the first $i$ items, enumerate how many each item is to be taken. The time complexity of this is $O(n^3)$.

Reviewer: It should be  $O(n^2 W)$, I suppose? We should also add complexity in the previous and this section, which should be $O(n W)$.

> The state transfer function follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This yields the following transition equation:
```

$$f_{i, j} = \max\limits_{k=0}^{\infty}(f_{i-1, j-k\cdot w_i} + k\cdot v_i)$$

> It can be found that for $f_{i, j}$, it can just transfer through $f_{i, j-w_i}$. The state transfer equation becomes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, it simplifies into a "flat" equation:
```

Author: I think it's better to leave this line in as it reveals how the simplification is taking place, which might not be trivial otherwise.

Reviewer: But it is already mentioned below ("The reason this works is...")?

> $$f_{i, j} = \max(f_{i-1, j},f_{i, j-w_i} + v_i)$$\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$f_{i, j} = \max(f_{i-1, j},f_{i, j-w_i} + v_i)$$
```

> The reason this works is that when we transfer like this, $f_{i, j-w_i}$ has already been updated by $f_{i, j-2\cdot w_i}$ and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason this works is that $f_{i, j-w_i}$ has already been updated by $f_{i, j-2\cdot w_i}$ and so on.
```

> Similar to the 0-1 knapsack, we can remove the first dimension to optimize the space complexity.

Reviewer: I think it's better to explicitly write the transition rule (which ends up the same), and clarify the correct execution order here.

## Multiple Knapsack

> Multiple knapsack is also a variant of 0-1 knapsack. The main difference is that there are $k_i$ of each item instead of just 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple knapsack is also a variant of 0-1 knapsack. The main difference is that there are $k_i$ of each item instead of just $1$.
```

### Explaination

A very simple idea is: "choose each item $k_i$ times" is equivalent to "$k_i$ of the same item is selected one by one". Thus converting it to a 0-1 knapsack model, which can be described by the transition function:

$$f_{i, j} = \max_{k=0}^{k_i}(f_{i-1,j-k\cdot w_i} + k\cdot v_i)$$

The time complexity of this process is $O(W\sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}k_i)$

### Binary Grouping Optimization

> We still consider converting the multiple knapsack model into a 0-1 knapsack model for optimization. The time complexity $O(Wn)$ can not be further optimized, so we focus on $O(\sum k_i)$.

Reviewer: Can't it really be optimized beyond $O(Wn)$? I don't know what are state of the art algorithms for Knapsack currently...

Author: In this section as I'm optimizing the solution for Multiple Knapsack problem, I'm assuming the 0-1 Knapsack can no further be optimized. The 0-1 [Knapsack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knapsack_problem) in itself is a big discussion but for the scope of this page I think mentioning $O(nW)$ is sufficient.

Reviewer: If it _can_ be further optimized beyond $O(nW)$ I think this should be reworded to not imply that $O(nW)$ is a theoretically best result.

```suggestion
We still consider converting the multiple knapsack model into a 0-1 knapsack model for optimization. The time complexity $O(Wn)$ can not be further optimized with the approach above, so we focus on $O(\sum k_i)$ component.
```

> Let $A_{i, j}$ denote the $j^{th}$ item split from the $i^{th}$ item. In the trivial approach discussed above, $A_{i, j}$ represents the same item for all $j \leq k_i$. The main reason for our low efficiency is that we are doing a lot of repetetive work. For example, consider selecting $A_{i, 1} and A_{i, 2}$, and selecting $A_{i, 3} and A_{i, 3}$. These two situations are completely equivalent. Thus optimizing the spiltting method will greatly reduces the time complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $A_{i, j}$ denote the $j^{th}$ item split from the $i^{th}$ item. In the trivial approach discussed above, $A_{i, j}$ represents the same item for all $j \leq k_i$. The main reason for our low efficiency is that we are doing a lot of repetetive work. For example, consider selecting $\{A_{i, 1},A_{i, 2}\}$, and selecting $\{A_{i, 3}, A_{i, 3}\}$. These two situations are completely equivalent. Thus optimizing the spiltting method will greatly reduce the time complexity.
```

> The grouping is made more effiecent by using binary grouping.

Reviewer: This is an interesting idea, but it will increase the number of items by a factor of $\log k_i$ making it $O(W n \log k)$. I think true $O(Wn)$ multiple knapsack requires maintaining a [maximum queue](https://cp-algorithms.com/data_structures/stack_queue_modification.html) of size $k_i$ for each remainder modulo $w_i$, and these nuances should be made more explicit.

Author: I'm not familiar with the method you mentioned. Indeed the method I've mentioned is $O(W \sum \log k_i) \approx O(Wn\log k)$, which seems good enough for such problem. Eg: [CSES - Book Shop II](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1159/), [sample solution](https://pastebin.com/7tXAaF6r)

Reviewer: The solution I'm describing is, assume you're currently processing an item described by $(w_i, v_i, k_i)$.

We have the transition rule $f_j \gets \max\limits_{k=0..k_i}(f_{j-kw_i} + kv_i) = j v_i + \max\limits_{k=0..k_i}g_{j-kw_i}$, where $g_{j} = f_j - j v_i$.

Now, for each remainder $j \bmod w_i$, you may independently store a maximum queue, so that you can extract the largest number among the last $k_i$ elements in $O(1)$ amortized. This way, we get a solution with total runtime of pure $O(nW)$, without $\log k$ factor.

In the example above, since each object has only two possible states (taken or not taken),
correspoding to binary 0 and 1. Thus, this type of problem is called "0-1 knapsack problem".

## 0-1 Knapsack

### Explaination

In the example above, the input to the problem is the following: the weight of $i^{th}$ item $w_{i}$, value of $i^{th}$ item $v_{i}$, and the total capacity of the knapsack $W$.

Let $f_{i, j}$ be the dynamic programming state holding the maximum total value the knapsack can carry with capacity $j$, when only the first $i$ items are considered.

Assuming that all states of the first $i-1$ items have been processed, what are the options for the $i^{th}$ item?

- When it is not put into the knapsack, the remaining capacity remains unchanged and total value does not change. Therefore, the maximum value in this case is $f_{i-1, j}$
- When it is put into the knapsack, the remaining capacity decreases by $w_{i}$ and the total value increases by $v_{i}$,
so the maximum value in this case is $f_{i-1, j-w_i} + v_i$

From this we can derive the dp transition equation:

$$f_{i, j} = \max(f_{i-1, j}, f_{i-1, j-w_i} + v_i)$$

> Further, as $f_{i}$ is only dependent on $f_{i-1}$, we can remove the first dimension. We obtain:
> 
> $$f_j \gets \max(f_j, f_{j-w_i}+v_i)$$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further, as $f_{i}$ is only dependent on $f_{i-1}$, we can remove the first dimension. We obtain the transition rule

$$f_j \gets \max(f_j, f_{j-w_i}+v_i)$$

that should be executed in the **decreasing** order of $j$ (so that $f_{j-w_i}$ implicitly corresponds to $f_{i-1,j-w_i}$ and not $f_{i,j-w_i}$).
```

**It is important to understand this transition rule, because most of the transitions for knapsack problems are derived in a similar way.**

### Implementation

The alorithm described can be implemented in $O(nW)$ as:

```.c++
for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++)
  for (int j = W; j >= w[i]; j--)
    f[j] = max(f[j], f[j - w[i]] + v[i]);
```

> Note the order of enumeration. We go over all possible weights for each item rather than the other way round. If we execute the loops in the other order, $f_W$ will get updated assuming that we can pick only one item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, note the order of execution. It should be strictly followed to ensure the following invariant: Right before the pair $(i, j)$ is processed, $f_k$ corresponds to $f_{i,k}$ for $k > j$, but to $f_{i-1,k}$ for $k < j$. This ensures that $f_{j-w_i}$ is taken from the $(i-1)$-th step, rather than from the $i$-th one.
```

## Complete Knapsack

The complete knapsack model is similar to the 0-1 knapsack, the only difference from the 0-1 knapsack is that an item can be selected an unlimited number of times instead of only once.

We can refer to the idea of 0-1 knapsack to define the state: $f_{i, j}$, the maximum value the knapsack can obtain using the first $i$ items with maximum capacity $j$.

It should be noted that although the state definition is similar to that of a 0-1 knapsack, its transition rule is different from that of a 0-1 knapsack.

### Explaination

> The trivial approach is, for the first $i$ items, enumerate how many each item is to be taken. The time complexity of this is $O(n^2W)$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trivial approach is, for the first $i$ items, enumerate how many times each item is to be taken. The time complexity of this is $O(n^2W)$.
```

This yields the following transition equation:

$$f_{i, j} = \max\limits_{k=0}^{\infty}(f_{i-1, j-k\cdot w_i} + k\cdot v_i)$$

At the same time, it simplifies into a "flat" equation:

$$f_{i, j} = \max(f_{i-1, j},f_{i, j-w_i} + v_i)$$

The reason this works is that $f_{i, j-w_i}$ has already been updated by $f_{i, j-2\cdot w_i}$ and so on.

Similar to the 0-1 knapsack, we can remove the first dimension to optimize the space complexity. This gives us the same transition rule as 0-1 knapsack.

$$f_j \gets \max(f_j, f_{j-w_i}+v_i)$$

### Implementation

The alorithm described can be implemented in $O(nW)$ as:

```.c++
for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++)

>   for (int j = 0; j <= W-w[i]; j++)
>     f[j + w[i]] = max(f[j + w[i]], f[j] + v[i]);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for (int j = w[i]; j <= W; j++)
    f[j] = max(f[j], f[j - w[i]] + v[i]);
```
Let's keep it consistent with the implementation of 0-1 knapsack.

```

> Despite the same transfer rule as 0-1 knapsack, the code above is incorrect for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite having the same transition rule, the code above is incorrect for 0-1 knapsack.
```

Observing the code carefully, we see that for the currently processed item $i$ and the current state $f_{i,j}$, 
when $j\geqslant w_{i}$, $f_{i,j}$ will be affected by $f_{i,j-w_{i}}$. 
This is equivalent to being able to put item $i$ into the backpack multiple times, which is consistent with the complete knapsack problem and not the 0-1 knapsack problem.

## Multiple Knapsack

Multiple knapsack is also a variant of 0-1 knapsack. The main difference is that there are $k_i$ of each item instead of just $1$.

### Explaination

A very simple idea is: "choose each item $k_i$ times" is equivalent to "$k_i$ of the same item is selected one by one". Thus converting it to a 0-1 knapsack model, which can be described by the transition function:

$$f_{i, j} = \max_{k=0}^{k_i}(f_{i-1,j-k\cdot w_i} + k\cdot v_i)$$

The time complexity of this process is $O(W\sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}k_i)$

### Binary Grouping Optimization

We still consider converting the multiple knapsack model into a 0-1 knapsack model for optimization. The time complexity $O(Wn)$ can not be further optimized with the approach above, so we focus on $O(\sum k_i)$ component.

> Let $A_{i, j}$ denote the $j^{th}$ item split from the $i^{th}$ item. In the trivial approach discussed above, $A_{i, j}$ represents the same item for all $j \leq k_i$. The main reason for our low efficiency is that we are doing a lot of repetetive work. For example, consider selecting $\{A_{i, 1},A_{i, 2}\}$, and selecting $\{A_{i, 3}, A_{i, 3}\}$. These two situations are completely equivalent. Thus optimizing the spiltting method will greatly reduce the time complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $A_{i, j}$ denote the $j^{th}$ item split from the $i^{th}$ item. In the trivial approach discussed above, $A_{i, j}$ represents the same item for all $j \leq k_i$. The main reason for our low efficiency is that we are doing a lot of repetetive work. For example, consider selecting $\{A_{i, 1},A_{i, 2}\}$, and selecting $\{A_{i, 2}, A_{i, 3}\}$. These two situations are completely equivalent. Thus optimizing the spiltting method will greatly reduce the time complexity.
```
Looks like a typo.

The grouping is made more effiecent by using binary grouping.

Specifically, $A_{i, j}$ holds $2^j$ individual items ($j\in[0,\lfloor \log_2(k_i+1)\rfloor-1]$).If $k_i + 1$ is not an integer power of $2$, another bundle of size $k_i-2^{\lfloor \log_2(k_i+1)\rfloor-1}$ is used to make up for it.

> Through the above splitting method, any sum of terms $\leq k_i$ will can be obtained by selecting a few $A_{i, j}$'s. After splitting each item in the described way, it is sufficient to use 0-1 knapsack method to solve it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through the above splitting method, it is possible to obtain any sum of $\leq k_i$ items by selecting a few $A_{i, j}$'s. After splitting each item in the described way, it is sufficient to use 0-1 knapsack method to solve the new formulation of the problem.
```

This optimization gives us a time complexity of $O(W\sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}\log k_i)$.

### Implementation

```c++
index = 0;
for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
  int c = 1, p, h, k;
  cin >> p >> h >> k;
  while (k > c) {
    k -= c;
    list[++index].w = c * p;
    list[index].v = c * h;
    c *= 2;
  }
  list[++index].w = p * k;
  list[index].v = h * k;
}
```

### Monotone Queue Optimization

In this optimization, we aim to convert the knapsack problem into a [maximum queue](https://cp-algorithms.com/data_structures/stack_queue_modification.html) one.

For convenience of description, let $g_{x, y} = f_{i, x \cdot w_i + y} ,\space g'_{x, y} = f_{i-1, x \cdot w_i + y}$. Then the transition rule can be written as:

$$g_{x, y} = \max_{k=0}^{k_i}(g'_{x-k, y} + v_i \cdot k)$$

> Further, let $G_{x, y} = g'_{x, y} - v_i \cdot x$. Then the transition rile can be expressed as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further, let $G_{x, y} = g'_{x, y} - v_i \cdot x$. Then the transition rule can be expressed as:
```

> $$g_{x, u} \gets \max_{k=0}^{k_i}(G_{x-k, y}) + v_i \cdot x$$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$g_{x, y} \gets \max_{k=0}^{k_i}(G_{x-k, y}) + v_i \cdot x$$
```

This transforms into a classic monotone queue optimization form. $G_{x, y}$ can be calculated in $O(1)$, so for a fixed $y$, we can calculate $g_{x, y}$ in $O(\lfloor \frac{W}{w_i} \rfloor)$ time.
Therefore, the complexity of finding all $g_{x, y}$ is $O(\lfloor \frac{W}{w_i} \rfloor) \times O(w_i) = O(W)$.

> In this way, the total complexity of the transfer is reduced to $O(nW)$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this way, the total complexity of the algorithm is reduced to $O(nW)$. 
```
